DOC-476: How-to - Palette SSO with Microsoft ADFS (#1102)
spectrocloud/librarium: content/docs/18-knowledgebase/00-how-to/2-palette-sso-with-adfs.md

This section talks about how we can enable Palette SSO with [Microsoft AD FS](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows-server/identity/ad-fs/development/ad-fs-openid-connect-oauth-concepts) based on OIDC.

<InfoBox>

  Note that you cannot use Microsoft AD FS for SAML based SSO with Palette, since Microsoft AD FS does not support the newer Canonical XML 1.1 standard that Palette employs. Hence you can only use the OIDC based approach for Microsoft AD FS.

</InfoBox>

# Prerequisites
In order to setup OIDC based SSO with Microsoft AD FS, you need to use one of the following versions:
* Microsoft AD FS 2022 (comes with Windows Server 2022)
* Microsoft AD FS 2019 (comes with Windows Server 2019)
* Microsoft AD FS 2016 (comes with Windows Server 2016)

If you need to be able to your AD FS service from outside your corporate network (this is typically the case), you will also need an AD FS Reverse Proxy. Microsoft unfortunately does not provide a tutorial on how to set this up, but you can find a good alternative [here](https://blog.matrixpost.net/set-up-active-directory-federation-services-ad-fs-5-0-adfs-reverse-proxy-part-2/)

# Enablement

> ## 1 - Create the AD FS Application Group for Palette

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Create the AD FS Application Group for Palette
```

> 

Reviewer: @kreeuwijk For the rest of the text, can you add the step to a bullet item please. The reason for this behavior is that if a user is stuck or is having an issue with a step, they can tell us, "I'm on step 8 ...".
You can keep the sub-headings as it helps beak up the information.

Open the AD FS Management console on your Windows Server and add a new Application Group for Palette:

![Add AD FS Application Group](palette-sso-with-adfs-images/01-add_application_group.png)

> Provide a suitable name for the Application Group and select **Server Application** from the list of templates. Then click **Next**:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Provide a suitable name for the application group and select **Server Application** from the list of templates. Then click **Next**:
```

Switch back to your AD FS Management console and paste the copied value into the **Redirect URI** field, then click **Add** to add it to the list:

![Paste Redirect URI](palette-sso-with-adfs-images/05-paste_redirect_uri.png)

This redirect URI is all that's needed for SSO to work with Palette. However, if you also want to leverage this same AD FS server for OIDC authentication into your Kubernetes clusters at some point, you should the following additional redirect URIs to the list as well:
* `http://localhost:8000` (for using kubectl with the `kube-login` plugin from a workstation)
* `https://console.spectrocloud.com/v1/shelly` (for using the web-based kubectl console)
* `https://<fqdn-of-k8s-dashboard>/oauth/callback` (for using OIDC authentication into Kubernetes Dashboard)

When finished entering redirect URLs, click **Next**. On the next page of the wizard, select **Generate a shared secret** and click **Copy to clipboard** to copy this value and save it somewhere. We will need to enter this value into Palette SSO configuration later:

![Copy Shared Secret](palette-sso-with-adfs-images/06-copy_shared_secret.png)

> Click **Next** and on the Summary screen, click **Next** again to complete the wizard. Now we need to another application to our Application Group. Select the newly created Application Group and click **Properties**:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Click **Next** and on the Summary screen, click **Next** again to complete the wizard. You need to add another application to the application group. Select the newly created application group and click **Properties**:
```

* The **Client Identifier** that we saved when creating the Application Group
* The base URL of your Palette tenant. This is equal to the URL shown by your browser when logged into Palette minus the path:

![Find Base URL](palette-sso-with-adfs-images/09a-base_url.png)

![Add Web API Identifiers](palette-sso-with-adfs-images/09b-add_identifiers.png)

Click **Next** when done. On the next screen, select a suitable policy for who can use this SSO and under what circumstances. If you're not sure which policy to choose, select **Permit everyone**, then click **Next**:

![Select Access Control Policy](palette-sso-with-adfs-images/10-select_policy.png)

On the next screen, by default only the **openid** scope is ticked. However since we want to include the user's groups in the OIDC claim, we need also enable the **allatclaims** scope. If your AD FS server does not yet have an **allatclaims** scope in the list, click **New scope...** and type `allatclaims` in the Name field, then click OK to add it. Ensure both scopes are enabled and then click **Next**:

![Enable Permitted Scopes](palette-sso-with-adfs-images/11-enable_scopes.png)

> On the Summary screen, click **Next** to finish the wizard. We need to set the Issuance Transform Rules for the Web API application, so we need to open up the application again. Double-click on the Web API entry (or click the **Edit** button) to open it:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On the Summary screen, click **Next** to finish the wizard. You need to set the **Issuance Transform Rules** for the Web API application. Open up the application again. Double-click on the Web API entry or click the **Edit** button to open it.
```

![Re-open Web API Application](palette-sso-with-adfs-images/12-reopen_webapi_app.png)

> Navigate to the **Issuance Transform Rules** tab and click on **Add Rule**:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Navigate to the **Issuance Transform Rules** tab and click on **Add Rule**.
```

![Add Issuance Transform Rule 1](palette-sso-with-adfs-images/13-add_transform_rule_1.png)

Select the **Send LDAP Attributes as Claims** template and click **Next**:

![Send LDAP As Claims Rule](palette-sso-with-adfs-images/14-ldap_as_claims.png)

Name the rule `OpenID - LDAP Attribute Claims`. Select **Active Directory** as the Attribute store and add the following LDAP mappings:

> * `E-Mail-Addresses` --> `email`
> * `Given Name` --> `given_name`
> * `Surname` --> `family_name`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **E-Mail-Addresses** --> `email`
* **Given Name** --> `given_name`
* **Surname** --> `family_name`
```
The drop-down values are UI elements so let's bold them instead.

You can select the items on the left from the list. You will need to type the items on the right manually. Ensure you use all lowercase characters for the values on the right:

![Set LDAP Claims](palette-sso-with-adfs-images/15-set_ldap_claims.png)

Click **Finish** to add the rule. Now click on **Add Rule...** again to add the second rule:

![Add Issuance Transform Rule 2](palette-sso-with-adfs-images/16-add_transform_rule_2.png)

Select the **Send Group Membership as Claims** template and click **Next**:

![Send Groups As Claims Rule](palette-sso-with-adfs-images/17-groups_as_claims.png)

> In the next screen, define the group claim as desired. In this example, we have a group in Active Directory called `SpectroTeam - Admins` and we want anyone that is a member of that group, to be issued a `groups` claim with the value `Admins`. In Palette this user will then automatically be mapped to a group with the same `Admins` name. We can then assign RBAC permissions to that group in Palette to give it the desired access:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the next screen, define the group claim as desired. In the following example, a group in Active Directory is called `SpectroTeam - Admins`. The desired behavior is for anyone that is a member of that group, to be issued a `groups` claim with the value `Admins`. In Palette this user will then automatically be mapped to a group with the same name, `Admins`. You can assign RBAC permissions to that group in Palette to give it the desired access.
```

![Set Group Claim](palette-sso-with-adfs-images/18-set_group_claim.png)

> Click **Finish** to add the rule. Click **OK** to save the changes to the Web API rule and click **OK** again to save the changes to the Application Group. Finally, note your AD FS identifier, we will need this for Palette in the next step. Typically this is your AD FS name plus `/adfs`. You can also take the Federation Service identifier and remove `/services/trust` from that URL:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Click **Finish** to add the rule. Click **OK** to save the changes to the Web API rule and click **OK** again to save the changes to the application group. 

Take note of your AD FS identifier, you will need this for Palette in the next step. Typically this is your AD FS name plus `/adfs`. You can also take the Federation Service identifier and remove `/services/trust` from that URL:
```

![Note AD FS Name](palette-sso-with-adfs-images/19-note_adfs_name.png)

> ## 2 - Enable OIDC SSO in Palette

Reviewer: ```suggestion
##  Enable OIDC SSO in Palette
```

> Open a web browser and navigate to your Palette subscription. Navigate to **Tenant Settings** --> **SSO** and click **OIDC**. Enter the following information:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Open a web browser and navigate to your [Palette](https://console.spectrocloud.com) subscription. 

Navigate to **Tenant Settings** --> **SSO** and click on **OIDC**. Enter the following information.
```

> * Issuer URL: Your AD FS issuer URL, typically this is your AD FS name plus `/adfs`
> * Client ID: the Client Identifier that we noted down in the beginning of the previous step
> * Client Secret: the Shared Secret that we generated in the previous step
> * Default Teams: leave empty if you don't want users without any groups claims to be assigned to a default group. If you do, enter the desired default group name here. If you use this option, be careful with how much access you give to that group.
> * Scopes: set this to `openid` and `allatclaims`
> * Email: leave at the default of `email`
> * First Name: leave at the default of `given_name`
> * Last Name: leave at the default of `family_name`
> * Spectro Team: leave at the default of `groups`

Reviewer: Let's try to put this in a markdown table to improve readability.
```suggestion
| Parameter         | Value                                                             |
|-------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Issuer URL        | Your AD FS issuer URL, typically this is your AD FS name plus /adfs|
| Client ID         | the client identifier that you noted down in the beginning of the previous step |
| Client Secret     | the shared secret that you generated in the previous step |
| Default Teams     | leave empty if you don't want users without any groups claims to be assigned to a default group. If you do, enter the desired default group name here. If you use this option, be careful with how much access you give to that group. |
| Scopes            | set this to openid and allatclaims |
| Email             | leave at the default of email |
| First Name        | leave at the default of given_name |
| Last Name         | leave at the default of family_name |
| Spectro Team      | leave at the default of groups |
```

![Enable Palette OIDC SSO](palette-sso-with-adfs-images/20-configure_palette_oidc.png)

> When all the information has been entered, click the **Enable** button at the button to enable SSO. You should receive an `OIDC configured successfully` message.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When all the information has been entered, click the **Enable** button to enable SSO. You will receive a message stating **OIDC configured successfully**.
```

## 3 - Create Teams in Palette

> All that's left to do now is to create Team(s) in Palette for the groups claim(s) that were configured in AD FS, and give them the appropriate permissions. For this example, we will create the `Admins` team and give it `Tenant Admin` permissions. You can repeat this for any other team that you've configured group claims for.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The remaining step is to create teams in Palette for the group claims that you configured in AD FS, and give them the appropriate permissions. For this example, you will create the `Admins` team and give it **Tenant Admin** permissions. You can repeat this for any other team that you have configured group claims.
```

> Open a web browser and navigate to your Palette subscription. Navigate to **Tenant Settings** --> **Users & Teams** --> **Teams** tab. Click the **+ Create Team** button.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Open a web browser and navigate to your Palette subscription. Navigate to **Tenant Settings** --> **Users & Teams** --> **Teams** tab. Click on the **+ Create Team** button.
```

![Create Palette Team](palette-sso-with-adfs-images/21-create_team.png)

> Specify `Admins` in the **Team name** field. We don't need to set any members now, as this will happen automatically from the SSO. Click **Confirm** to create the team.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Specify `Admins` in the **Team name** field. You don't need to set any members now, as this will happen automatically from the SSO. Click **Confirm** to create the team.
```

![Name Palette Team](palette-sso-with-adfs-images/22-name_team.png)

> You'll be returned back to the list of Teams. Click on the newly created `Admins` Team to open its details screen. To give this team administrative access to the entire tenant (and thus all Projects in it), we will give this Team the `Tenant Admin` role. Click on **Tenant Roles** --> **+ Add Tenant Role**:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You will be returned back to the list of teams. Click on the newly created **Admins** team to review the details page. To give this team administrative access to the entire tenant and all the projects in it, assign the **Tenant Admin** role. Click on **Tenant Roles** --> **+ Add Tenant Role**:
```

![Palette Tenant Roles](palette-sso-with-adfs-images/23-tenant_roles.png)

> Click on **Tenant Admin** to enable the role, this automatically enables all other roles with fewer permissions. Click **Confirm** to add the role:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Click on **Tenant Admin** to enable the role. Click **Confirm** to add the role.
```
@kreeuwijk The fewer permissions part confused me. I took it out for now as it didn't quite make sense.

![Add Tenant Role](palette-sso-with-adfs-images/24-add_tenant_role.png)

> You will see the `Roles have been updated` message to confirm the change. Repeat this procedure for any other teams you need, ensuring they're given the appropriate permissions. Finally click the `X` next to **Team Details** in the top left corner to exit this screen.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You will receive a message stating **Roles have been updated**. Repeat this procedure for any other teams but ensure they are given the appropriate permissions. 

Click the **X** next to **Team Details** in the top left corner to exit this screen.
```

> Congratulations! You have now successfully configured Palette SSO based on OIDC with Microsoft AD FS!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You have now successfully configured Palette SSO based on OIDC with Microsoft AD FS!
```
We don't congratulate the reader because that implies this is a mountainous task, which is debatable but it's best practice to avoid this type of language in tutorials and how-tos.

# Validation

> Let's log in through SSO as a user that is a member of the `SpectroTeam - Admins` group in Active Directory to verify that we're automatically getting added to the `Admins` group in Palette.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Log in to Palette through SSO as a user that is a member of the `SpectroTeam - Admins` group in Active Directory to verify that users are automatically added to the `Admins` group in Palette.
```

> If you're still logged into Palette with a non-SSO user, log out first by clicking on your name at the top right and selecting `Logout from <tenant name>`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you're still logged into Palette with a non-SSO user, log out by clicking on the **User Menu** at the top right and selecting **Logout**.
```

![User Logout](palette-sso-with-adfs-images/25-user_logout.png)

> Notice that the Palette login screen now only shows a big **Sign in** button and no longer a username/password field. Below this button there is an **SSO issues? --> Use your password** link. This can be used to bypass SSO and login with a local Palette account in case there's ever a problem with SSO and you need to access Palette without SSO.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Palette login screen now displays a **Sign in** button and no longer presents a username and password field. Below the **Sign In** button, there is an **SSO issues? --> Use your password** link. This link can be used to bypass SSO and log in with a local Palette account in case there is an issue with SSO and you need to access Palette without SSO.
```

> Click the **Sign in** button to login via SSO:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Click on the **Sign in** button to log in via SSO.
```

![User SSO Login](palette-sso-with-adfs-images/26-palette_login.png)

> If this is the first time, you will be redirected to the Microsoft AD FS login page. Depending on your company's SSO settings, this could be a simple login form or also require MFA (Multi-Factor Authentication). Make sure you log in as a user that is a member of the `SpectroTeam - Admins` group in Active Directory. Once authenticated, you will automatically be redirected back to Palette and logged into Palette as that user.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If this is the first time you are login in with SSO, you will be redirected to the Microsoft AD FS login page. Depending on your organization's SSO settings, this could be a simple login form or require MFA (Multi-Factor Authentication).

Make sure you log in as a user that is a member of the `SpectroTeam - Admins` group in Active Directory. Once authenticated, you will automatically be redirected back to Palette and logged into Palette as that user.
```

> You should now be automatically added to the `Admins` team in Palette. To verify, navigate to **Tenant Settings** --> **Users & Teams** --> **Teams** tab. Click the **Admins** team and view the `TEAM MEMBERS` section:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You are now automatically added to the `Admins` team in Palette. To verify, navigate to the left **Main Menu**, select **Tenant Settings** --> **Users & Teams** --> **Teams** tab. Click the **Admins** team and view the team members section.
```

![Palette Team Members](palette-sso-with-adfs-images/27-team_members.png)

> Notice that the user we just logged in with has automatically been added to this team.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The user you logged in with has automatically been added to this team.
```

---
title: 'Palette SSO with Microsoft AD FS'

> metaTitle: 'Setting up Palette SSO with Microsoft Active Directory Federation Service (AD FS)'

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
metaTitle: 'Set up Palette SSO with Microsoft Active Directory Federation Service (AD FS)'
```

> metaDescription: 'Setting up Palette SSO with Microsoft Active Directory Federation Service (AD FS)'

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
metaDescription: 'Set up Palette SSO with Microsoft Active Directory Federation Service (AD FS)'
```

![Note AD FS Name](palette-sso-with-adfs-images/19-note_adfs_name.png)

##  Enable OIDC SSO in Palette

23. Open a web browser and navigate to your [Palette](https://console.spectrocloud.com) subscription. 

Navigate to **Tenant Settings** --> **SSO** and click on **OIDC**. Enter the following information.

| Parameter         | Value                                                             |
|-------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Issuer URL        | Your AD FS issuer URL, typically this is your AD FS name plus /adfs|
| Client ID         | the client identifier that you noted down step **4** |
| Client Secret     | the shared secret that you generated in step **8** |
| Default Teams     | leave empty if you don't want users without any groups claims to be assigned to a default group. If you do, enter the desired default group name here. If you use this option, be careful with how much access you give to that group. |
| Scopes            | set this to `openid` and `allatclaims` |
| Email             | leave at the default of `email` |
| First Name        | leave at the default of `given_name` |

> | Last Name         | leave at the default of `family_name` |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Last Name         | Keep `family_name` as the default. |
```

> | Spectro Team      | leave at the default of `groups` |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Spectro Team      | Keep `groups` as the default. |
```

![Enable Palette OIDC SSO](palette-sso-with-adfs-images/20-configure_palette_oidc.png)

> 24. When all the information has been entered, click the **Enable** button to enable SSO. You will receive a message stating **OIDC configured successfully**.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
24. When all the information has been entered, click **Enable** to enable SSO. You will receive a message stating **OIDC configured successfully**.
```

## 3 - Create Teams in Palette

> The remaining step is to create teams in Palette for the group claims that you configured in AD FS, and give them the appropriate permissions. For this example, you will create the `Admins` team and give it **Tenant Admin** permissions. You can repeat this for any other team that you have configured group claims.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The remaining step is to create teams in Palette for the group claims that you configured in AD FS, and give them the appropriate permissions. For this example, you will create the `Admins` team and give it **Tenant Admin** permissions. You can repeat this for any other team that you configured with group claims.
```

> 25. Open a web browser and navigate to your Palette subscription. Navigate to **Tenant Settings** --> **Users & Teams** --> **Teams** tab. Click on the **+ Create Team** button.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
25. Open a web browser and navigate to your Palette subscription. Navigate to **Tenant Settings** --> **Users & Teams** --> **Teams** tab, and click **+ Create Team**.
```

![Create Palette Team](palette-sso-with-adfs-images/21-create_team.png)

26. Specify `Admins` in the **Team name** field. You don't need to set any members now, as this will happen automatically from the SSO. Click **Confirm** to create the team.

![Name Palette Team](palette-sso-with-adfs-images/22-name_team.png)

> 27. You will be returned back to the list of teams. Click on the newly created **Admins** team to review the details page. To give this team administrative access to the entire tenant and all the projects in it, assign the **Tenant Admin** role. Click on **Tenant Roles** --> **+ Add Tenant Role**:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
27. The list of teams displays again. Select the newly created **Admins** team to review its details. To give this team administrative access to the entire tenant and all the projects in it, assign the **Tenant Admin** role. Select  **Tenant Roles**  and click **+ Add Tenant Role**:
```

![Palette Tenant Roles](palette-sso-with-adfs-images/23-tenant_roles.png)

28. Click on **Tenant Admin** to enable the role. Click **Confirm** to add the role.

![Add Tenant Role](palette-sso-with-adfs-images/24-add_tenant_role.png)

> You will receive a message stating **Roles have been updated**. Repeat this procedure for any other teams but ensure they are given the appropriate permissions. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You will receive a message stating **Roles have been updated**. Repeat this procedure for any other teams, taking care to ensure they are given the appropriate permissions. 
```

29. Click the **X** next to **Team Details** in the top left corner to exit this screen.

You have now successfully configured Palette SSO based on OIDC with Microsoft AD FS!

# Validation

> 30. Log in to Palette through SSO as a user that is a member of the `SpectroTeam - Admins` group in Active Directory to verify that users are automatically added to the `Admins` group in Palette.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Log in to Palette through SSO as a user that is a member of the `SpectroTeam - Admins` group in Active Directory to verify that users are automatically added to the `Admins` group in Palette.
```

> If you're still logged into Palette with a non-SSO user, log out by clicking on the **User Menu** at the top right and selecting **Logout**.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you're still logged into Palette with a non-SSO user, log out by selecting **Logout** in the **User Menu** at top right.
```

![User Logout](palette-sso-with-adfs-images/25-user_logout.png)

> 31. The Palette login screen now displays a **Sign in** button and no longer presents a username and password field. Below the **Sign In** button, there is an **SSO issues? --> Use your password** link. This link can be used to bypass SSO and log in with a local Palette account in case there is an issue with SSO and you need to access Palette without SSO.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. The Palette login screen now displays a **Sign in** button and no longer presents a username and password field. Below the **Sign In** button, there is an **SSO issues? --> Use your password** link. This link can be used to bypass SSO and log in with a local Palette account in case there is an issue with SSO and you need to access Palette without SSO.
```

Click on the **Sign in** button to log in via SSO.

![User SSO Login](palette-sso-with-adfs-images/26-palette_login.png)

> 32. If this is the first time you are logging in with SSO, you will be redirected to the Microsoft AD FS login page. Depending on your organization's SSO settings, this could be a simple login form or require MFA (Multi-Factor Authentication).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. If this is the first time you are logging in with SSO, you will be redirected to the Microsoft AD FS login page. Depending on your organization's SSO settings, this could be a simple login form or require MFA (Multi-Factor Authentication).
```

Make sure you log in as a user that is a member of the `SpectroTeam - Admins` group in Active Directory. Once authenticated, you will automatically be redirected back to Palette and logged into Palette as that user.

> 33. You are now automatically added to the `Admins` team in Palette. To verify, navigate to the left **Main Menu**, select **Tenant Settings** --> **Users & Teams** --> **Teams** tab. Click the **Admins** team and view the team members section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. You are now automatically added to the `Admins` team in Palette. To verify, navigate to the left **Main Menu**, select **Tenant Settings** --> **Users & Teams** --> **Teams** tab. Click the **Admins** team and view the team members section.
```

![Palette Team Members](palette-sso-with-adfs-images/27-team_members.png)

> The user you logged in with has automatically been added to this team.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The user you logged in as has automatically been added to this team.
```
